---
layout: post
title: Glad I'm not a millionaire (or, innovation in the airline industry)
categories:
- Crazy Ideas
---

Every time I am flying on a plane, which happens quite a bit, I get these crazy
idea's for how to innovate in the airspace. Some collegues who have had to
listen to me during flights will happily agree these are crazy. Even though, we
might see some of these idea's come into play at some point in the future, so I
thought I would write them up. 

Most of these idea's are probably not going to be succesful, I will admit.
Which is why I am very happy I am not a millionaire who could try to find out.


### (Non-) baby flights

Ever flown long haul flights? Say, Europe to New Zealand? Did you notice the
cute couple with the 2 month old baby? When they board it is like watching a
cluster bomb exploding in the cabin: everyone around the couple stands up
looking for the nearest stewardess to see if they can change their seats away
from the 2 month old.

What if an airline would make two changes at the same time? Designate
particular flights as "baby free". This way, folks that appreciate the quiet
around them might be willing to pay a little bit more to get on.

On the other hand, the airline could designate other flights as "baby
friendly". These could sport multiple seats turned into cribs, a lavatory
changed into a small playroom. It might even include one of those nannies that
keeps kids busy! Again, wouldn't suprise me if parents were willing to pay more
for this on a 12 hour long flight!

### No security for convenience

If you look at people and see how they deal with risk, it is very peculiar.
Take for example texting on your mobile phone while driving. Lot's of people do
it. Wouldn't surprise me a bit if more people died due to car accidents while
talking/texting/facebooking on the phone, adjusting their TomTom GPS, etc.

Over the last decade the airline industry, rightfully so, has become completely
security scared. Now while that is completely understandable and probably
called for, it does not necessarily have to be this way. Imagine the following
airline:

* We do away with the security boarding talk (oxygen mask, seat belt, etc).
  No one is listing anyways, most people hear it 10+ times a year. Instead, do
  these inside the airport building. Once a person has completed their
  "training", stamp their passport or something simlar and check for the stamp
  at the gate. Stamps would be valid for 4 years. Now suddenly I don't need to
  listen to the blaring cabin attendants anymore, thank you!
* Another one for convenience: remove most of the pre-flight processes. For
  example: why require passengers to book their flights in advance? If there
  was an airline that would litereally let me walk up to their doorstep, swipe
  my credit card and get on the plane (all in under an hour) how much more
  convient would that be?
* Offer early morning "quiet sleeper flights". Combining the security talk-idea from
  above, with even more quiet time: no announcements on the PA. If you have
  your eyes closed, no questions from the flight attended (Coffee ser?),
  instead have a little sign you can put on your tray table (Coffee please!).
  No "local time" and "destination weather" announcements. Basically if people
  want to sleep, let them!

Would these above changes be an attraction to enough people to make it
worthwhile? Maybe...

In short, the question becomes: if people are willing to sacrifice "security"
at every step of their lives, what would be possible in the airline industry if
we would backtrack on some of the "security measures" we have been implementing
in the last decade?


### Quiet flights


### Stunt flights
