---
layout: post
title: Cooking a steak
image_titles: false
categories: 
  - Cooking
---

Cooking a steak should be something every man (and women) should be able to
do. Yet so many people are screwing it up. Badly. Very badly. And it's
unnecessary. After explaining various different concepts to various
different people I thought I'd write it all down so that I have a place to
point to.

As such, please let me know any feedback/comments you may have. Either leave
a comment at the bottom, or even better just send me a pull request on
Github.

This is how a perfect steak looks something like this:

![Picture by sheilaz413 on flickr.com][steak]

Characteristics of such a steak are:

1. Outside: nice and brown (giving a lot of taste)
2. Inside: juicy and red, roughly 50°C.
3. Inbetween: the amount of "grey" meat is at an
   absolute minimum (say a few millimeters).

So, how to get there? Here are various concepts/tactics that you can use.
Most of it is in order of execution, but not everything. So please read the
whole thing first before firing up the grill!

With some additional equipment you can get better results, and I'll make
note of those. Without the equipment you can still make this work but your
results will differ time and time again. (In other words, most of the
equipment makes sure your steaks come out perfect 9 out 10, not 5 out of
10.)

### Preperation

In general, no need to "warm" up your meat outside the fridge ahead of time.
It's not helping you getting to the goals we have set ourselves and more
likely it will help growing the bacteria population. Please do not do that
to your loved ones.

Try to get some steak that is not too thin, you're ideally looking at 3-4 cm
thick steaks. Thinner, and it gets much harder to get your steak rare in the
pan-fry method. (Sous-vide does not have that problem.)

To get to goal 1, we need a dry steak. If your steak is not dry and you put
it into the pan, your heat source will first need to evaporate the water.
This is because the steak only gets to be brown (the so called [Maillard
reactions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maillard_reaction)) at high
temperatures (there are a series of reactions, but they only *start* at
110°C). But if there is still water/liquid on the outside of the steak, it
can not get any hotter than 100°C until that water is evaporated.  Not good.

For this reason you need to think about salting your steak. You see (and you
should try this at home!) if you salt meat, the salt will pull out moisture
out of steak, which is not where you want it to be (hint: you want it *in
the steak*). This process only takes ~5 minutes. Once this has happened you
will see water on top of your steak. Or rather, it is a
[brine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brine). If you wait longer,
approximately 40 minutes, the difference in saline levels pulls the brine
back into the steak. See this picture (courtesy of [Kenji
Alt](http://www.seriouseats.com/2011/03/the-food-lab-more-tips-for-perfect-steaks.html))
for a visual (time passes from left to right):

![Picture of salt on steak by Kenji Alt of The Food Lab][Salt]

To go short, take your steaks, wipe them with some paper towels, salt them
and put them back into the fridge, preferably on a rack, for at least an
hour for best results.

### Pan frying

For this preperation method you want to use a non-flavoured oil. Don't go
with butter as the milk proteins in butter will burn before your stake gets
seared, spoiling the taste (and smell) of your fantastic piece of meat.
Also, there is no need to put the oil into the pan. Simply heat up the
skillet on high heat without anything in there. Put a little bit of oil on
top of the steak, then put the steak oil-side down into the skillet.

Now that the frying has started, turn the stake every 20-30 seconds. You
want to apply energy or heat as evenly on both sides as possible. Flipping
the steak is the easiest way to accomplish this.

Now for million dollar question: for how long do you continue frying the
steak? In essence, it is not actually about *"how long?"*, but *"till what
internal temperature?"*. For a rare steak this means the middle of the steak
should reach 51.6°C, and not much higher or you'll end up with medium-rare
which is only 3 degrees (!) away at 54.4°C. For other temperatures, please
see this [overview][temp]. By the way, keep in mind that on a properly handled steak
bacteria are only on the outside of the meat (not on the inside) which makes
a rare steak possible as all bacteria get fried during the searing.

There are two ways to accomplish this temperature goal. The first,
non-recommended way is to resolve this equation (courtesy of Harvard):

![Picture of correct but way to complicated equation][Eq]

Too many variables to be sure, but we can take away a few intuitive things
such as L squared (size of the meat) is a huge factor, as is the difference
of external and target temperature. (See first part of this
[video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HNqeSzH6qY8) if you see a challenge,
rather than a problem.)

The second, recommended way is to actually have a thermometer. You won't be
able to *predict* ahead of time when your meat is done, but you know once
you get there&mdash;perfect for most non-labratory uses! I have a [ThermaPen](http://www.thermoworks.com/products/thermapen/) which comes highly recommended; it is durable and super fast to read out.

[temp]: http://www.foodnetwork.com/recipes-and-cooking/meat-and-poultry-temperature-guide/index.html
[Steak]: {{site.baseurl}}/photos/x_steak.jpg
[Salt]: {{site.baseurl}}/photos/x_salt.jpg
[Eq]: {{site.baseurl}}/photos/x_equation.png
